+++
title = "Algebraic Curves Lecture 6: Two more corollaries of Riemann Roch"
hascode = true
description = "The 6th lecture of algebraic curves by Karl Christ"
tags = ["blog"]
date = "2024-02-02"
published = true
public = false
+++

@def mintoclevel=2
@def maxtoclevel=3

# {{ title }}

> {{ description }}

\toc

---

### Correction from last time

- The dimension of a variety is the degree of a Hilbert polynomial.
- The leading coefficient of the Hilbert polynomial is $\frac{d}{n!}$.

### Final two corollaries

We finished with the following observation, a corollary following from Riemann-Roch:

\begin{cor}
1. Any line bundle of degree $\geq 2g$ is base point free
1. Any line bundle of degree $\geq 2g+1$ is very ample
1. Any curve can be embedded in $\mathbb P^{g+1}$.
1. A line bundle is ample if and only if its degree is positive.
\end{cor}

You get the dimension of the embedding above in (3) directly from Riemann Roch: RR says $h^0(L) = d - g + 1$, so if $d = 2g + 1$ then $h^0(L) = g + 2$.

The last corollary we'll mention, at least for now, is the following.

\begin{cor}
    For any set of points $\{p_1, ..., p_k\}$ in $X$, $X\setminus \{p_1, ..., p_k\}$ is affine.
\end{cor}
\begin{proof}
    Set $D = \sum_i P_i\in \textrm{Div}(X)$. Let $L = \mathcal O_X(D)^{\otimes \ell}$ be very ample. 

    Embedd $X$ in $\mathbb P^r$ via $\varphi_L$. Then there is a hyperplane $H\subseteq \mathbb P^r$ such that $H|_{\varphi_L(X)} = \ell \cdot D$. Thus $X\setminus D = X|_{\mathbb P^r \setminus H}$ is affine.
\end{proof}

Note that this is definitely not true in general for varieties, even if you replace "points" with "divisors". For example, $\mathbb P^2$ minus a point is not affine. If you take $\mathbb P^2$ blown up at a point and then remove the exceptional divisor, you get the same thing as $\mathbb P^2$ with a point removed; so it's still not affine.

The proof above works because, if you take any effective divisor $D$, then you have a global section of $\mathcal O_X(D)$. This is because you can find a regular function which vanishes on $D$.

@@revindentblock
**Example:** *(genus 1 curves)*. 
Let $X$ be a curve of genus 1, $p\in X$, and consider $L_n = \mathcal O_X(n\cdot p)$ for $n\mathbb N$. Riemann Roch says that $h^0(L_n) = d - g + 1 = d$ as soon as $d\geq 2g - 1 = 1$. A corollary from [last week](/pages/writing/journal/algcurves5/) says
    \begin{align*}
        \deg(K_X) = 2g - 2 = 0
    \end{align*}
    and
    \begin{align*}
        h^0(K_X) = g = 1,
    \end{align*}
    hence $K_X \cong \mathcal O_X$.

If $n=1$, then $h^0(L_n) = 1$. 

If $n=2$ then $h^0(L_2) = 2$, and hence we get 2:1 a map $X\xrightarrow{2:1} \mathbb P^1$. Thus $H^0(L_2) = textrm{span}\{1, x\}$.

If $n=3$, then $h^0(L_3) = 3$. We get a new global section $y$ with a triple pole at $p$. $L_3$ defines a map $\varphi_{L_3}:X\to \mathbb P^2$ which can be written as an affine chart $[z^3 : zx : y]$, where $x = x/z^2$ and $y = y/z^3$. Here $z$ is a local coordinate which vanishes to order $1$ at $p$. The intersection of $z = 0$ with the image of the map $\varphi_{L_3}$ will be $[0:0:1]$. In particular, we have a "globally defined" marked point on $X$.

If $n=4$, $h^0(L_4) = 4$, the new section is $x^2$.

If $n=5$, $h^0(L_5) = 5$, the new section is $x\cdot y$.

If $n=6$, $h^0(L_4) = 4$, but two new sections $x^3$ and $y^2$. This tells you that you must have a linear relation between all the sections now; i.e. we have an equation of the form
\begin{align*}
    y^2 + a_1xy + a_3y = x^3 + a_2 x^2 + a_4x + a_6
\end{align*}
where $x$ and $y$ have been rescaled so the coefficients of $x^3$ and $y^2$ are $1$. This is some standard form of an elliptic curve.
@@
\begin{rmk}
    A genus $1$ curve + a marked point $p$ is called an elliptic curve. It has a group structure compatible with the algebraic structure, making it an Abelian variety.

    Not all distinct choices of $a_1,...,a_5$ yield distinct isomorphism classes of curves, and some choices yield singular curves. Nonetheless, we get a map $\mathbb A^5\dashrightarrow \mathcal M_{1,1}$.
\end{rmk}
\begin{rmk}
    This shows that $\mathcal M_{1,1}$ (the moduli space of genus one curves with one marked point, i.e. the moduli space of elliptic curves) is **unirational**. It's not particularly interesting here because $\mathcal M_{1,1}$ is just $\mathbb A^1$, but as the genus and number of marked points increases this becomes more interesting.
\end{rmk}

## Adjunction
Suppose we have $Y\subseteq X$ a subvariety of a variety $X$. On any smooth variety $X$ we can define the canonical sheaf $K_X = \bigwedge^n_{i=1}\Omega_{X}$.

**Example:** $K_{\mathbb P^n} = \mathcal O_{\mathbb P^n}(-n-1).$

In an open standard chart $u_1,...,u_n$ of $\mathbb P^n$, $K_{\mathbb P^n}$ is generated by $du_1 \wedge ... \wedge du_n$. On a different chart with standard coordinates $w_1,...,w_n$, the transition functions between the charts are something like $u_1 = \frac{1}{w_i}$ and $u_j = \frac{w_j}{w_i}$. Over this $w_1,...,w_n$ chart $K_X$ is generated by $dw_1\wedge ... \wedge dw_n$, and
\begin{align*}
    du_1 = d\frac{1}{w_i} = -\frac{1}{w_i^2} dw_i
\end{align*}
and
\begin{align*}
    du_i = d\frac{w_i}{w_j} = \frac{1}{w_i}dw_j - \frac{w_j}{w_i^2}dw_j.
\end{align*}

Checking $du_1\wedge ...\wedge du_n$, applying bilinearity and canceling accordingly, you should end up with something like
\begin{align*}
    du_1 \wedge ...\wedge du_n = -\frac{1}{w_1^{n+1}}\cdot \left(dw_1\wedge ...\wedge dw_n\right).
\end{align*}
The point of this calculation is that I end up with a pole of order $n+1$.
