+++
title = "Bernd Meeting"
hascode = true
description = "Notes following meeting with Bernd during which I finally understood what I'm trying to do"
tags = ["blog"]
date = "2023-11-09"
published = true
blogpost = false
+++

@def mintoclevel=2
@def maxtoclevel=3

# Bernd Meeting 2023 - 11 - 09

Today I finally understood what Bernd would like me to prove, so I thought I'd write it down here. 

First we must understand the localization statement for a scheme $X$ equipped with the action of a torus $T$. Denote by $\hat T = \Hom_{\Grp}(T,\mathbb C^\times)$ the character group of $T$ and $S = \Sym(\hat T)$ the symmetric algebra over $\math Z$ of $\hat T$ as an Abelian group. The equivariant Chow group of a point identifies to $S$, and more generally, $A_*^T(X)$ is a $S$-module. The statement of localization for $X$ then says that the inclusion map $i:X^T\to X$ of the fixed points into $X$ induces an isomorphism
\begin{equation}
    i_*:A^T_*(X^T) \to A^T_*(X)
\end{equation}
after inverting all nonzero elements of $S$. See Corollary 2 of ["Equivariant Chow Groups For Torus Actions", M. Brion] for this statement and any of the Edin Graham papers for the definitions of equivariant Chow groups.

This statement makes no assumptions on $X$; in particular, we don't require $X$ to be nonsingular. If we *do* have nonsingularity however we can say more. In this case we have a ring structure on $A^*_T(X)$, the equivariant Chow ring, given by intersection product. It's more or less the collection of the following facts [Corollary 3.2.1, "Equivariant Chow Groups For Torus Actions, M. Brion].

@@revindentblock
    *Localization.* &nbsp; Let $X$ be a nonsingular filtrable $T$-variety, i.e. a nonsingular variety with a $T$-action which is "filterable". Then
1. The inclusion map $i:X^T\to X$ induces an injective $S$-algebra homomorphism $i^*:A^*_T(X)_{\mathbb Q} \to A^*_T(X^T)_{\mathbb Q}$ which is surjective over the quotient field of $S$.
1. The $S_{\mathbb Q}$-module $A_*^T(X)_{\mathbb Q}$ is free. If moreover the $\mathbb Z$-module $A_*(X^T)$ is free, then the $S$-module $A_*^T(X)$ is free.
1. If $X^T$ consists of finitely many points $x_1,...,x_m$, then, for any generic one-paramter subgroup $\lambda$, the $S$-module $A_*^T(X)$ is freely generated by the classes of the closures of strata $X_+(x_i,\lambda)$ for $1\leq i \leq m$.
@@

There's stuff I'm not defining here -- "filterable" and "$X_+(x_i, \lambda)$" for instance -- but the important takeaways are that

- there is always a localization isomorphism for a variety $X$ with a toric action $T$
- there is a nice localization *formula* when $X$ is nonsingular.

*The current project is to investigate the existence of a localization *formula* in the case of toric singularities. Here are some questions/comments that resulted from today:*

1. Which toric varieties are complete intersections? Edin Graham have a localization formula in the case that $X\hookright M = \mathbb P^N$ is a complete intersection. *This question is likely going to be gross -- "toric" and "complete intersection" don't seem to have much to do with one another.*
1. Starting from scratch, understand the localization theorem in the Edin Graham paper and in the M. Brion paper. Look at the toric variety corresponding to the cone over a square (this is not simplicial, simplicial toric varieties have extra stuff you can say about them).
1. Try to start thinking of examples, beginning with a singular surface perhaps, and then computing a localization formula for it.
1. Read some of the examples in section 1.6 of [*Convex Bodies in Algebraic Geometry*, Oda]. Need to review stuff about toric singularities and refinements of cones etc.

